The following is a conversation with Michael Littman, a computer science professor at Brown University
doing research on and teaching machine learning, reinforcement learning, and artificial intelligence.
He enjoys being silly and lighthearted in conversation, so this was definitely a fun one.
Quick mention of each sponsor, followed by some thoughts related to the episode.
Thank you to SimplySafe, a home security company I use to monitor and protect my apartment.
ExpressVPN, the VPN I've used for many years to protect my privacy on the internet.
Masterclass, online courses that I enjoy from some of the most amazing humans in history,
and better help online therapy with a licensed professional.
Please check out these sponsors in the description to get a discount and to support this podcast.
As a side note, let me say that I may experiment with doing some solo episodes in the coming month
or two. The three ideas I have floating in my head currently is to use one, a particular moment
in history, two, a particular movie, or three, a book to drive a conversation about a set of
related concepts. For example, I could use 2001 Space Odyssey or Ex Machina to talk about AGI
for one, two, three hours, or I could do an episode on the rise and fall of Hitler and Stalin
each in a separate episode, using relevant books and historical moments for reference.
I find the format of a solo episode very uncomfortable and challenging, but that just
tells me that it's something I definitely need to do and learn from the experience.
Of course, I hope you come along for the ride. Also, since we have all this moment of built up
unannouncements, I'm giving a few lectures on machine learning at MIT this January. In general,
if you have ideas for the episodes, for the lectures, or for just short videos on YouTube,
let me know in the comments that I still definitely read despite my better judgment
and the wise sage device of the great Joe Rogan. If you enjoy this thing, subscribe on YouTube,
review it with five stars and I'll have a podcast, follow on Spotify,
support on Patreon, or connect with me on Twitter at Lex Freedman.
And now here's my conversation with Michael Littman. I saw a video of you talking to Charles
Isbell about Westworld, the TV series. You guys were doing a kind of thing where you're
watching new things together, but let's rewind back. Is there a sci fi movie or book
or shows that was profound that had an impact on you philosophically or just specifically
something you enjoyed nerding out about? Yeah, interesting. I think a lot of us have been inspired
by robots in movies. The one that I really like is there's a movie called Robot and Frank,
which I think is really interesting because it's very near term future where robots are being deployed
as helpers in people's homes. And we don't know how to make robots like that at this point,
but it seemed very plausible. It seemed very realistic or imaginable. I thought that was
really cool because they're awkward. They do funny things that raise some interesting issues,
but it seemed like something that would ultimately be helpful and good if we could do it right.
Yeah, he was an older cranky gentleman. He was an older cranky jewel thief. Yeah.
It's kind of a funny little thing, which is he's a jewel thief and so he pulls the robot
into his life, which is something you could imagine taking a home robotics thing and pulling
into whatever quirky thing that's involved in your existence. It's meaningful to you,
exactly so. Yeah, and I think from that perspective, I mean, not all of us are jewel thieves. And so
when we bring our robots into our lives, explains a lot about this apartment, actually. But no,
the idea that people should have the ability to make this technology their own, that it becomes
part of their lives. And I think that's, it's hard for us as technologists to make that kind
of technology. It's easier to mold people into what we need them to be. And just that opposite
vision I think is really inspiring. And then there's a anthropomorphization where we project
certain things on them because I think the robot was kind of dumb. But I have a bunch of Roombas
that play with and they, you immediately project stuff onto them, much greater level of intelligence.
We'll probably do that with each other too. Much, much, much greater degree of compassion.
That's right. One of the things we're learning from AI is where we are smart and where we are
not smart. Yeah. You also enjoy, as people can see, and I enjoyed myself watching you sing
and even dance a little bit, a little bit of dancing. A little bit of dancing. That's not
quite my thing. As a method of education, or just in life, in general. So easy question.
What's the definitive, objectively speaking, top three songs of all time? Maybe something that,
to walk that back a little bit, maybe something that others might be surprised by. Three songs
that you kind of enjoy. That is a great question that I cannot answer. But instead, let me tell
you a story. Pick a question you do want to answer. That's right. I've been watching the
presidential debates and vice presidential debates and it turns out, yeah, it's really,
you can just answer any question you want. So it's a related question. Yeah, well said.
I really like pop music. I've enjoyed pop music ever since I was very young. So 60s music, 70s
music, 80s music, this is all awesome. And then I had kids and I think I stopped listening to music
and I was starting to realize that the, like my musical taste had sort of frozen out. And so I
decided in 2011, I think to start listening to the top 10 Billboard songs each week. So I'd be on
the treadmill and I would listen to that week's top 10 songs so I could find out what was popular
now. And what I discovered is that I have no musical taste whatsoever. I like what I'm familiar
with. And so the first time I'd hear a song is the first week that was on the charts. I'd be like,
and then the second week, I was into it a little bit and the third week, I was loving it. And by
the fourth week is like just part of me. And so I'm afraid that I can't tell you the most, my
favorite song of all time, because it's whatever I heard most recently. Yeah, that's interesting.
People have told me that there's an art to listening to music as well. And you can start to,
if you listen to a song, just carefully, explicitly just force yourself to really listen. You start
to, I did this when I was part of Jazz Band and Fusion Band in college. You start to hear the layers
of the instruments. You start to hear the individual instruments and you start to,
you can listen to classical music or to orchestra this way, you can listen to jazz this way.
It's funny to imagine you now to walk in that forward to listening to pop hits now as like a
scholar listening to like Cardi B or something like that or Justin Timberlake. No, not Timberlake,
Bieber. They've both been in the top 10 since I've been listening. They're still up there. Oh,
my God, I'm so cool. If you haven't heard Justin Timberlake's top 10 in the last few years,
there was one song that he did where the music video was set at essentially NeurIPS. Oh, wow.
Oh, the one with the robotics. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah. It's like at an academic conference
and he's doing a demo and it was sort of a cross between the Apple, like Steve Jobs kind of talk
and NeurIPS. So, you know, it's always fun when AI shows up in pop culture. I wonder if he consulted
somebody for that. That's really interesting. So maybe on that topic, I've seen your celebrity
multiple dimensions, but one of them is you've done cameos in different places. I've seen you
in a TurboTax commercial as like I guess the brilliant Einstein character. And the point
is that TurboTax doesn't need somebody like you. It doesn't need a brilliant person.
Very few things need someone like me. But yes, they were specifically emphasizing the idea that
you don't need to be like a computer expert to be able to use their software. How did you end up
in that world? I think it's an interesting story. So I was teaching my class. It was an
intro computer science class for nonconcentrators, nonmajors. And sometimes when people would visit
campus, they would check in to say, hey, we want to see what a class is like. Can we sit on your
class? So a person came to my class who was the daughter of the brother of the husband of the best
friend of my wife. Anyway, basically a family friend came to campus to check out Brown and
asked to come to my class and came with her dad. Her dad is who I've known from various kinds of
family events and so forth, but he also does advertising. And he said that he was recruiting
scientists for this ad, this TurboTax set of ads. And he said, we wrote the ad with the idea that
we get the most brilliant researchers, but they all said no. So can you help us find the B level
scientists? And I'm like, sure, that's who I hang out with. So that should be fine. So I put
together a list and I did what some people called a Dick Cheney. So I included myself on the list
of possible candidates with a little blurb about each one and why I thought that would make sense
for them to do it. And they reached out to a handful of them, but then they ultimately,
they YouTube stalked me a little bit and they thought, oh, I think he could do this. And they
said, okay, we're going to offer you the commercial. I'm like, what? So it was such an interesting
experience because they have another world, the people who do nationwide kind of ad campaigns
and television shows and movies and so forth. It's quite a remarkable system that they have going
because it's like a set. Yeah. So I went to, it was just somebody's house that they rented in
New Jersey, but in the commercial, it's just me and this other woman. In reality, there were 50
people in that room and another, I don't know, half a dozen kind of spread out around the house
in various ways. There were people whose job it was to control the sun. They were in the backyard
on ladders putting filters up to try to make sure that the sun didn't glare off the window in a way
that would wreck the shot. So there was like six people out there doing that. There was three people
out there giving snacks, the craft table. There was another three people giving healthy snacks
because that was a separate craft table. There was one person whose job it was to keep me from
getting lost. And I think the reason for all this is because so many people are in one place at one
time, they have to be time efficient. They have to get it done. The morning they were going to do
my commercial and the afternoon they were going to do a commercial of a mathematics professor from
Rinston. They had to get it done. No wasted time or energy. And so there's just a fleet of people
all working as an organism and it was fascinating. I was just the whole time just looking around like
this is so neat. Like one person whose job it was to take the camera off of the cameraman
so that someone else whose job it was to remove the film canister because every couple's takes,
they had to replace the film because film gets used up. It was just, I don't know, I was geeking
out the whole time. It was so fun. How many takes did it take? It looked the opposite like there
was more than two people there. It was very relaxed. Right. Yeah. The person who I was in the scene
with is a professional. She's an improv comedian from New York City. And when I got there, they
had given me a script such as it was. And then I got there and they said, we're going to do this
as improv. I'm like, I don't know how to improv. I don't know what you're telling me to do here.
Yeah. Don't worry. She knows. I'm like, okay, we'll see how this goes. I guess I got pulled
into the story because like, where the heck did you come from? I guess in the scene. Like,
how did you show up in this random person's house? I don't know. Yeah. Well, I mean,
the reality of it is I stood outside in the blazing sun. There was someone whose job it was
to keep an umbrella over me because I started to sweat. I started to sweat. And so I would
wreck the shot because my face was all shiny with sweat. So there was one person who would dab me
off at an umbrella. But yeah, like the reality of it, like why is this strange stalkery person
hanging around outside somebody's house? We're not sure. We have to look in. We have to wait
for the book. But are you... So you make, like you said, YouTube, you make videos yourself.
You make awesome parody, sort of parody songs that kind of focus in a particular aspect of
computer science. How much... Those seem really natural. How much production value goes into
that? Do you also have a team of 50 people? The videos, almost all the videos, except for the
ones that people would have actually seen, were just me. I write the lyrics. I sing the song. I
generally find a backing track online because I'm like, you can't really play an instrument.
And then I do, in some cases, I'll do visuals using just like PowerPoint. Lots and lots of
PowerPoint to make it sort of like an animation. The most produced one is the one that people
might have seen, which is the overfitting video that I did with Charles Isbell. And that was
produced by the Georgia Tech and Udacity people because we were doing a class together. It was
kind of... I usually do parody songs kind of to cap off a class at the end of a class.
So that one you're wearing, so it was just a thriller, you're wearing the Michael Jackson,
the red leather jacket. The interesting thing with podcasting that you're also into is that
I really enjoy is that there's not a team of people. It's kind of more... Because you know,
there's something that happens when there's more people involved than just one person. That's just
the way you start acting. I don't know. There's a censorship. You're not given, especially for
like slow thinkers like me, you're not... And I think most of us are if we're trying to actually
think we're a little bit slow and careful, it kind of large teams get in the way of that.
And I don't know what to do with that. To me, it's very popular to criticize
quote unquote mainstream media, but there is legitimacy to criticizing them the same. I
love listening to NPR for example, but it's clear that there's a team behind it.
There's a constant commercial breaks. There's this kind of like rush of like,
okay, I have to interrupt you now because we have to go to commercial. Just this whole,
it creates, it destroys the possibility of nuanced conversation. Yeah, exactly.
Evian, which Charles Isbel who I talked to yesterday told me that Evian is naive backwards,
which the fact that his mind thinks this way is just quite brilliant. Anyway, there's a freedom
to this podcast. He's Dr. Awkward, which by the way, is a palindrome. That's a palindrome that
I happen to know from other parts of my life. And I just figured out, well, you know, use it against
Charles. Dr. Awkward. So what was the most challenging parody song to make? Was it the
Thriller one? No, that one was really fun. I wrote the lyrics really quickly. And then I gave it
over to the production team. They recruited an acapella group to sing. That went really smoothly.
It's great having a team because then you can just focus on the part that you really love,
which in my case is writing the lyrics. For me, the most challenging one, not challenging in a bad
way, but challenging in a really fun way, was I did, one of the parody songs I did is about
the halting problem in computer science. The fact that you can't create a program that can tell
for any other arbitrary program, whether it's actually going to get stuck in an infinite loop
or whether it's going to eventually stop. And so I did it to an 80s song because that's, I hadn't
started my new thing of learning current songs. And it was Billy Joel's The Piano Man, which is
a great song. Sing me a song. You're The Piano Man. So the lyrics are great because first of all,
it rhymes. Not all songs rhyme. I've done Rolling Stone songs, which turn out to have no rhyme scheme
whatsoever. They're just sort of yelling and having good time, which makes it not fun from a
parody perspective because like you can say anything, but the lines rhyme and there was a lot
of internal rhymes as well. And so figuring out how to sing with internal rhymes, a proof of the
halting problem was really challenging. And it was, I really enjoyed that process.
What about the last question on this topic? What about the dancing in the thriller video?
How many takes that take? So I wasn't planning to dance. They had me in the studio and they gave
me the jacket and it's like, well, you can't, if you have the jacket and the glove, like there's
not much you can do. So I think I just danced around and then they said, why don't you dance a
little bit? There was a scene with me and Charles dancing together. They did not use it in the
video, but we recorded it. I don't remember. Yeah, yeah. No, it was pretty funny. And Charles,
who has this beautiful, wonderful voice, doesn't really sing. He's not really a singer. And so
that was why I designed the song with him doing a spoken section and me doing the singing. It's
very like Barry White. Yeah, smooth baritone. Yeah. Yeah, it's great. That was awesome.
So one of the other things Charles said is that, you know, everyone knows you as like a super nice
guy, super passionate about teaching and so on. What he said, I don't know if it's true, that
despite the fact that you are cold blood, like, okay, I will admit this finally for the first
time that was that was me. It's the Johnny Cash song. The Manorino, just to watch him die.
That you actually do have some strong opinions and some topics. So if this in fact is true, what
a strong opinions would you say you have? Is there ideas you think maybe an artificial
intelligence, machine learning, maybe in life that you believe is true, that others might,
you know, some number of people might disagree with you on. So I try very hard to see things from
multiple perspectives. There's this great Calvin and Harbs, Calvin and Hobbes cartoon where Cal,
do you know, okay, so Calvin's dad is always kind of a bit of a foil and he talked Calvin and Calvin
had done something wrong. The dad talks to him into like seeing it from another perspective
and Calvin like this breaks Calvin because he's like, oh my gosh, now I can see the opposite
sides of things. And so it becomes like a Cubist cartoon where there is no front and back. Everything
is just exposed and it really freaks him out. And finally he settles back down. It's like,
oh good, no, I can make that go away. But like I'm that, I live in that world where I'm trying to
see everything from every perspective all the time. So there are some things that I've formed
opinions about that I would be harder, I think, to disavow me of. One is the super intelligence
argument and the existential threat of AI is one where I feel pretty confident in my feeling about
that one. Like I'm willing to hear other arguments, but like I am not particularly moved by the idea
that if we're not careful, we will accidentally create a super intelligence that will destroy
human life. Let's talk about that. Let's get you in trouble and record your video. It's like Bill
Gates, I think he said like some quote about the internet that that's just going to be a small
thing. It's not going to really go anywhere. And then I think Steve Ballmer said, I don't know why
I'm sticking on Microsoft. That's something that like smartphones are useless. There's no reason
why Microsoft should get into smartphones that kind of. So let's get you, let's talk about
AGI. As AGI is destroying the world, we'll look back at this video and see. No, I think it's
really interesting to actually talk about because nobody really knows the future. So you have to
use your best intuition. It's very difficult to predict it, but you have spoken about AGI
and the existential risks around it and sort of based on your intuition that
we're quite far away from that being a serious concern relative to the other concerns we have.
Can you maybe unpack that a little bit? Yeah, sure, sure, sure. So as I understand it, that
for example, I read Boston's book and a bunch of other reading material about this sort of general
way of thinking about the world. And I think the story goes something like this, that we
will at some point create computers that are smart enough that they can help design the next
version of themselves, which itself will be smarter than the previous version of themselves,
and eventually bootstrapped up to being smarter than us, at which point we are essentially at
the mercy of this sort of more powerful intellect, which in principle, we don't have any control over
what its goals are. And so if its goals are at all out of sync with our goals, for example,
the continued existence of humanity, we won't be able to stop it. It'll be way more powerful than
us and we will be toast. So there's some, I don't know, very smart people who have signed on to
that story. And it's a, it's a compelling story. I want to, now I can really get myself in trouble.
I once wrote an op ed about this, specifically responding to some quotes from Elon Musk,
who has been, you know, on this very podcast, more than once, and
AI summoning the demon. I think he said, but then he came to Providence, Rhode Island,
which is where I live, and said to the governors of all the states, you know,
you're worried about entirely the wrong thing. You need to be worried about AI. You need to be
very, very worried about AI. So, and journalists kind of reacted to that. They wanted to get
people's people's take. And I was like, okay, my, my, my belief is that one of the things that
makes Elon Musk so successful and so remarkable as an individual is that he believes in the power
of ideas. He believes that you can have, you can, if you know, if you have a really good idea for
getting into space, you can get into space. If you have a really good idea for a company or for
how to change the way that people drive, you just have to do it and it can happen.
It's really natural to apply that same idea to AI. You see the systems that are doing some pretty
remarkable computational tricks, demonstrations, and then to take that idea and just push it
all the way to the limit and think, okay, where does this go? Where is this going to take us next?
And if you're a deep believer in the power of ideas, then it's really natural to believe that
those ideas could be taken to the extreme and, and kill us. So I think, you know, his strength is
also his undoing because that doesn't mean it's true. Like it doesn't mean that that has to happen,
but it's natural for him to think that. So another way to phrase the way he thinks, and
I, I find it very difficult to argue with that line of thinking. So Sam Harris is another person
from the neuroscience perspective that thinks like that is saying, well, is there something
fundamental in the physics of the universe that prevents this from eventually happening?
And that's, Nick Bostrom thinks in the same way that kind of zooming out, yeah, okay, we humans
now are existing in this like timescale of minutes and days. And so our intuition is in this timescale
of minutes, hours and days. But if you look at the span of human history, is there any reason
we can't see this in 100 years? And like, is there, is there something fundamental about
the laws of physics that prevent this? And if it doesn't, then it eventually will happen,
or we will destroy ourselves in some other way. And it's very difficult, I find to actually argue
against that. Yeah. Me too. And not sound like, not sound like you're just like rolling your
eyes. Like I have like science fiction, we don't have to think about it. But even, even worse than
that, which is like, I don't know, kids, but like, I got to pick up my kids now, like this, okay,
I see more pressing short term. Yeah, there's more pressing short term things that like,
stop it with this existential crisis will have much, much shorter things like now,
especially this year, there's COVID. So like any kind of discussion like that is,
like there's, you know, there's pressing things today. And then so the same Harris argument,
well, like any day, the exponential singularity can occur is very difficult to argue against.
I mean, I don't know. But part of his story is also, he's not going to put a date on it.
It could be in a thousand years, it could be in a hundred years, it could be in two years.
It's just that as long as we keep making this kind of progress, it's ultimately
has to become a concern. I kind of am on board with that. But the thing that the piece that I
feel like is missing from that, that way of extrapolating from the moment that we're in,
is that I believe that in the process of actually developing technology that can
really get around in the world and really process and do things in the world in a sophisticated
way, we're going to learn a lot about what that means, which that we don't know now,
because we don't know how to do this right now. If you believe that you can just turn on a deep
learning network and it eventually give it enough compute and it'll eventually get there.
Well, sure, that seems really scary, because we won't be in the loop at all. We won't be
helping to design or target these kinds of systems. But I don't see that feels like it
is against the laws of physics, because these systems need help. They need to surpass the
difficulty, the wall of complexity that happens in arranging something in the form that will
happen. I believe in evolution. I believe that there's an argument. There's another argument,
just to look at it from a different perspective, that people say, why don't believe in evolution?
How could evolution, it's sort of like a random set of parts assemble themselves into a 747,
and that could just never happen. So it's like, okay, that's maybe hard to argue against. But
clearly, 747s do get assembled. They get assembled by us. Basically, the idea being that
there's a process by which we will get to the point of making technology that has that kind of
awareness. And in that process, we're going to learn a lot about that process, and we'll have
more ability to control it or to shape it or to build it in our own image. It's not something
that is going to spring into existence like that 747. And we're just going to have to contend with
it completely unprepared. Now, it's very possible that in the context of the long arc of human history,
it will in fact spring into existence. But that that springing might take like if you look at
nuclear weapons, like even 20 years is a springing in the context of human history. And it's very
possible just like with nuclear weapons that we could have, I don't know what percentage you want
to put at it, but the possibility of could have knocked ourselves out. Yeah, the possibility of
human beings destroying themselves in the 20th century with the nuclear weapons, I don't know,
you can, if you really think through it, you could really put it close to like, I don't know,
30 40%, given like the certain moments of crisis that happen. So like, I think
one, like fear in the shadows that's not being acknowledged is it's not so much the AI will
run away is is that as it's running away, we won't have enough time to think through how to stop it.
Right. Fast takeoff or fume. Yeah, I mean, my much bigger concern, I wonder what you think about
it, which is we won't know it's happening. So I kind of think that there's an AGI situation
already happening with social media, that our minds, our collective intelligence of human
civilizations already being controlled by an algorithm. And like, we're we're already super,
like the level of a collective intelligence, thanks to Wikipedia, people should donate to
Wikipedia to feed the AGI. Man, if we had a super intelligence that that was in line with
Wikipedia's values, that it's a lot better than a lot of other things I could imagine. I trust
Wikipedia more than I trust Facebook or YouTube as far as trying to do the right thing from a
rational perspective. Now, that's not where you were going. I understand that. But it does strike
me that there's sort of smarter and less smart ways of exposing ourselves to each other on the
internet. Yeah, the interesting thing is that Wikipedia and social media have very different
forces. You're right. I mean, Wikipedia, if AGI was Wikipedia, it'd be just like this cranky,
overly competent editor of articles. There's something to that. But the social media aspect
is not so the vision of AGI is as a separate system that's super intelligent. That's super
intelligent. That's one key little thing. I mean, there's the paperclip argument that's super dumb,
but super powerful systems. But with social media, you have a relatively like algorithms
we may talk about today, very simple algorithms that when something Charles talks a lot about,
which is interactive AI, when they start like having at scale, like tiny little interactions
with human beings, they can start controlling these human beings. So a single algorithm can
control the minds of human beings slowly to where we might not realize it can start wars,
it can start, it can change the way we think about things. It feels like in the long arc of history,
if I were to sort of zoom out from all the outrage and all the tension on social media,
that it's progressing us towards better and better things. It feels like chaos and toxic and all that
kind of stuff. It's chaos and toxic. Yeah. But it feels like actually, the chaos and toxic is
similar to the kind of debates we had from the founding of this country. There's a civil war
that happened over that period. And ultimately, it was all about this tension of like,
something doesn't feel right about our implementation of the core values we hold
as human beings and they're constantly struggling with this. And that results in
people calling each other, just being shady to each other on Twitter. But ultimately,
the algorithm is managing all that. And it feels like there's a possible future in which that algorithm
controls us into the direction of self destruction and whatever that looks like.
Yeah. So all right, I do believe in the power of social media to screw us up royally. I do believe
in the power of social media to benefit us too. I do think that we're in a, yeah, it's sort of
almost got dropped on top of us. And now we're trying to, as a culture, figure out how to cope
with it. There's a sense in which, I don't know, there's some arguments that say that, for example,
I guess, college age students now, late college age students now, people who were in middle school
when social media started to really take off, maybe really damaged. This may have really
hurt their development in a way that we don't have all the implications of quite yet.
That's the generation who, and I hate to make it somebody else's responsibility,
but they're the ones who can fix it. They're the ones who can figure out,
how do we keep the good of this kind of technology without letting it eat us alive?
And if they're successful, we move on to the next phase, the next level of the game. If they're not
successful, then, yeah, then we're going to wreck each other. We're going to destroy society.
So you're going to, in your old age, sit on a porch and watch the world burn because of the
TikTok generation that... I believe, well, so this is my kid's age, right? And certainly my
daughter's age, and she's very tapped in to social stuff, but she's also, she's trying to find that
balance of participating in it and in getting the positives of it, but without letting it eat her
alive. And I think sometimes she ventures... I hope she doesn't watch this. Sometimes I think
she ventures a little too far and is consumed by it, and other times she gets a little distant.
And if there's enough people like her out there, they're going to navigate this choppy waters.
That's an interesting skill, actually, to develop. I talked to my dad about it. You know, I've now
somehow, this podcast in particular, but other reasons has received a little bit of attention.
And with that, apparently in this world, even though I don't shut up about love and I'm just
all about kindness, I have now a little mini army of trolls. It's kind of hilarious, actually,
but it also doesn't feel good. But it's a skill to learn to not look at that.
Like to moderate, actually, how much you look at that. The discussion I have with my dad, it's
similar to, it doesn't have to be about trolls. It could be about checking email, which is like,
if you're anticipating, you know, there's, my dad runs a large institute at Drexel University,
and there could be stressful emails you're waiting, like there's drama of some kinds.
And so like, there's a temptation to check the email. If you send an email and you got it,
and that pulls you in into, it doesn't feel good. And it's a skill that he actually complains that
he hasn't learned, I mean, he grew up without it. So he hasn't learned the skill of how to
shut off the internet and walk away. And I think young people, while they're also being,
quote unquote, damaged by like, you know, being bullied online, all of those stories,
which are very like horrific, you basically can't escape your bullies these days when you're growing
up. But at the same time, they're also learning that skill of how to be able to shut off the,
like disconnect with it, be able to laugh at it, not take it too seriously. It's a fascinating,
like we're all trying to figure this out. Just like you said, has it been dropped on us? And
we're trying to figure it out. Yeah, I think that's really interesting. And I, I, I guess I've become
a believer in the human design, which I feel like I don't completely understand, like, how do you
make something as robust as us? Like we're so flawed in so many ways. And yet, and yet, you know,
we dominate the planet. And we do seem to manage to get ourselves out of scrapes, eventually,
not necessarily the most elegant possible way, but somehow we get, we get to the next step.
And I don't know how I'd make a machine do that. I, I, I generally speaking, like if I train one
of my reinforcement learning agents to play a video game, and it works really hard on that
first stage over and over and over again, and it makes it through it succeeds on that first level.
And then the new level comes, and it's just like, okay, I'm back to the drawing board.
And somehow humanity, we keep leveling up, and then somehow managing to put together the skills
necessary to achieve success, some semblance of success in that next level too. And, you know,
I hope we can keep doing that. You mentioned reinforcement learning. So you've had a couple
of years in the field. No, quite, you know, quite a few, quite a long career in artificial
intelligence broadly, but reinforcement learning specifically. Can you maybe give a hint about
your sense of the history of the field? And in some ways it's changed with the advent of deep
learning, but as long roots, like how is it we've done it out of your own life? How have you seen
the community change or maybe the ideas that it's playing with change? I've had the privilege,
the pleasure of being, of having almost a front row seat to a lot of this stuff. And it's been
really, really fun and interesting. So when I was in college in the 80s, early 80s, the neural net
thing was starting to happen. And I was taking a lot of psychology classes and a lot of computer
science classes as a college student. And I thought, you know, something that can play tic tac toe
and just like learn to get better at it, that ought to be a really easy thing. So I spent almost,
almost all of my, what would have been vacations during college, like hacking on my home computer,
trying to teach it how to play tic tac toe and programming language. Basic. Oh yeah. That's
my first language. That's my native language. Is that when you first fell in love with computer
science, just like programming basic on that? What was the computer? Do you remember? I had a
TRS80 model one before they were called model ones, because there was nothing else. I got my
computer in 1979. So I was, I would have been bar mitzvahed, but instead of having a big party
that my parents threw on my behalf, they just got me a computer, because that's what I really,
really, really wanted. I saw them in the, in the, in the mall in Rayershack. And I thought,
what, how are they doing that? I would try to stump them. I would give them math problems,
like one plus, and then in parentheses, two plus one. And I would always get it right. I'm like,
how do you know so much? Like I've had to go to an algebra class for the last few years to learn
this stuff. And you just seem to know. So I was, I was, I was smitten and I got a computer. And I
think ages 13 to 15, I have no memory of those years. I think I just was in my room with the
computer. Listening to Billy Joel. Communing, possibly listening to the radio, listening to
Billy Joel. That was the one album I had on vinyl at that time. And, and then I got it on cassette
tape. And that was really helpful. Because then I could play it. I didn't have to go down in my
parents Wi Fi or Hi Fi. Sorry. And then age 15, I remember kind of walking out and like, okay,
I'm ready to talk to people again. Like I've learned what I need to learn here.
And so yeah, so, so that was, that was my home computer. And so I went to college and I was
like, oh, I'm totally going to study computer science. I opted the college I chose specifically
had a computer science major, the one that I really want the college I really wanted to go to
didn't. So bye bye to them. Which college did you go to? So I went to Yale. Princeton would
have been way more convenient. And it was just beautiful campus. And it was close enough to
home. And I was really excited about Princeton. And I visited, I said, so computer science major
like, well, we have computer engineering. I'm like, oh, I don't like that word engineering.
I like computer science. I really, I want to do like, you're saying hardware and software.
They're like, yeah, I'm like, I just want to do software. I couldn't care less about hardware.
You grew up in Philadelphia? I grew up outside Philly. Yeah. Yeah. So the, you know, local
schools were like Penn and Drexel and Temple, like everyone in my family went to Temple,
at least at one point in their lives, except for me. So yeah, Philly family.
Yale had a computer science department. And that's when you, it's kind of interesting.
You said 80s in neural networks. That's when the neural networks is a hot new thing or a hot thing
period. So what is that in college when you first learned about neural networks? Yeah.
When she learned like how it was in a psychology class, not in a CS class.
Yeah. Was it psychology or cognitive science or like, do you remember like what context?
It was, yeah, yeah, yeah. So, so I was a, I've always been a bit of a cognitive psychology
groupie. So like I, I studied computer science, but I like, I like to hang around where the
cognitive scientists are. Cause I don't know brains, man. They're like, they're wacky. Cool.
And they have a bigger picture view of things. They're a little less engineering, I would say.
They're more, they're more interested in the nature of cognition and intelligence and perception
and how like division system work. Like they're asking always bigger questions. Now with the
deep learning community, there, I think more, there's a lot of intersections, but I do find in
that the, the neuroscience folks actually, and cognitive psychology, cognitive science folks
are starting to learn how to program, how to use neural artificial neural networks.
And they are actually approaching problems in like totally new, interesting ways. It's fun to
watch that grass students from those departments like approach a problem of machine learning.
Right. They come in with a different perspective. Yeah. They don't care about like your image
net data set or whatever. They, they want like to understand the, the, the like the basic mechanisms
at the, at the neuronal level, at the functional level of intelligence. So it's kind of, it's
going to cool to see them work. But yeah. Okay. So you always love, you're always a
group of cognitive psychology. Yeah. Yeah. And so, so it was in a class by Richard Garrick.
He was kind of my, my favorite psych professor in college. And I took like three different
classes with him. And yeah, so that we were, they were talking specifically the class, I think was
kind of a, there was a big paper that was written by Steven Pinker and Prince. I don't, I'm blanking
on Prince's first name, but Princeton, Pinker and Prince, they wrote kind of a, they were at that
time kind of like, I'm blanking on the names of the current people. The cognitive scientists who
were complaining a lot about deep networks. Oh, Gary, Gary Marcus. Gary Marcus. And who else? I
mean, there's a few, but Gary, Gary is the most feisty. Sure. Gary is very feisty. And with this,
with his coauthor, they, they, you know, they're kind of doing these kind of takedowns where they
say, okay, well, yeah, it does all these amazing things, amazing things. But here's a shortcoming,
here's a shortcoming, here's a shortcoming. And so the Pinker Prince paper is kind of like the,
that generation's version of Marcus and Davis, right? Where they're, they're trained as cognitive
scientists, but they're looking skeptically at the results in the, in the artificial intelligence,
neural net kind of world and saying, yeah, it can do this and this and this, but like, it can't do
that. And it can't do that. And it can't do that. Maybe in principle, or maybe just in practice at
this point. But, but the fact of the matter is you're, you've narrowed your focus too far to be
impressed, you know, you're impressed with the things within that circle, but you need to broaden
that circle a little bit. You need to look at a wider set of problems. And so, so we, so I was
in this seminar in college, that was basically a close reading of the Pinker Prince paper,
which was like really thick. There was a lot going on in there. And, and it, and it talked about
the reinforcement learning idea a little bit. I'm like, Oh, that sounds really cool, because
behavior is what is really interesting to me about psychology anyway. So making programs that, I mean,
programs are things that behave. People are things that behave. Like I want to make learning that
learns to behave. In which way was reinforcement learning presented? Is this talking about human
and animal behavior? Or are we talking about actual mathematical construct?
That's right. So that's a good question. Right. So this is, I think it wasn't actually talked about
as behavior in the paper that I was reading. I think that it just talked about learning.
And to me, learning is about learning to behave, but really neural nets at that point were about
learning, like supervised learning. So learning to produce outputs from inputs. So I kind of tried
to invent reinforcement learning. I, when I graduated, I joined a research group at Belcore,
which had spun out of Bellabs recently at that time, because of the divestiture of the, of
long distance and local phone service in the 1980s, 1984. And I was in a group with Dave Ackley,
who was the first author of the Boltzmann machine paper. So the very first neural net paper that
could handle XOR, right? So XOR sort of killed neural nets, the very first, the zero width
the first winter. Yeah. The, the Perceptron's paper and Hinton, along with the student Dave Ackley,
and, and I think there was other authors as well, showed that no, no, no, with bolts machines,
we can actually learn nonlinear concepts. And so everything's back on the table again. And that
kind of started that second wave of neural networks. So Dave Ackley was, he became my mentor at,
at Belcore. And we talked a lot about learning and life and computation and how all these things
fit together. Now, Dave and I have a podcast together. So, so I get to kind of enjoy that
sort of his perspective once again, even, even all these years later. And so I said, so I said,
I was really interested in learning, but in the concept of behavior. And he's like, oh, well,
that's reinforcement learning here. And he gave me Rich Sutton's 1984 TD paper. So I read that
paper, I honestly didn't get all of it. But I got the idea, I got that they were using
that he was using ideas that I was familiar with in the context of neural nets and, and
like sort of back prop. But with this idea of making predictions over time, I'm like,
this is so interesting, but I don't really get all the details I said to Dave. And Dave said,
oh, well, why don't we have him come and give a talk. And I was like,
wait, what, you can do that? Like, these are real people? I thought they were just words. I thought
it was just like ideas that somehow magically seeped into paper. He's like, no, I, I, I, I know
Rich, like, we'll just have him come down and he'll give a talk. And so I was, you know,
my mind was blown. And so Rich came and he gave a talk at Bellcore. And he talked about what he
was super excited, which was they had just figured out at the time, Q learning. So Watkins had
visited the Rich Sutton's lab at UMass or Andy Bartow's lab that Rich was a part of.
And he was really excited about this because it resolved a whole bunch of problems that he
didn't know how to resolve in the, in the earlier paper. And so, for people who don't know,
TD, temporal difference, these are all just algorithms for reinforcement learning.
Right. And TD, temporal difference, in particular, is about making predictions over time.
And you can try to use it for making decisions, right? Because if you can predict how good a
future action, an action outcomes will be in the future, you can choose one that has better.
And, but the theory didn't really support changing your behavior. Like the predictions
had to be of a consistent process if you really wanted it to work. And one of the things that
was really cool about Q learning, another algorithm for reinforcement learning is it was
off policy, which meant that you could actually be learning about the environment and what
the value of different actions would be while actually figuring out how to behave optimally.
Yeah. So that was a revelation.
Yeah. And the proof of that is kind of interesting. I mean, that's really surprising to me when I
first read that and then enriched Rich Sutton's book on the matter. It's kind of beautiful that
a single equation can capture all one line of code and like you can learn anything.
Yeah, like, so equation and code, you're right. Like you can, the code that you can arguably,
at least if you like squint your eyes can say this is all of intelligence,
that you can implement that in a single, well, I think I started with Lisp, which is a shout
out to Lisp, with like a single line of code, key piece of code, maybe a couple,
that you could do that as kind of magical. It feels so good to be true.
Well, and it sort of is. Yeah. It seems they require an awful lot of extra stuff supporting it.
But nonetheless, the idea is really good. And as far as we know, it is a very reasonable way of
trying to create adaptive behavior, behavior that gets better at something over time.
Did you find the idea of optimal at all compelling that you could prove that it's optimal? So like
one part of computer science that it makes people feel warm and fuzzy inside is when you
can prove something like that assorting algorithm, worst case, runs and log in, and it makes everybody
feel so good. Even though in reality, it doesn't really matter what the worst case is, what matters
is like, does this thing actually work in practice on this particular actual set of data that I
enjoy? Did you? So here's a place where I have maybe a strong opinion, which is like,
you're right, of course, but no, no. So what makes worst case so great, right? If you have a
worst case analysis, so great is that you get modularity. You can take that thing and plug it
into another thing and still have some understanding of what's going to happen when you click them
together, right? If it just works well in practice, in other words, with respect to some distribution
that you care about, when you go plug it into another thing, that distribution can shift,
it can change, and your thing may not work well anymore. And you want it to and you wish it does
and you hope that it will, but it might not. So you're saying you don't like machine learning.
But we have some positive theoretical results for these things. You can come back at me
with, yeah, but they're really weak and yeah, they're really weak. And you can even say that
sorting algorithms, like if you do the optimal sorting algorithm, it's not really the one that
you want. And that might be true as well. But it is, the modularity is a really powerful state.
I really like that. As an engineer, you can then assemble different things you can count on them
to be, I mean, it's interesting. It's a balance, like with everything else in life, you don't want
to get too obsessed. I mean, this is what computer scientists do, which they tend to get obsessed,
they over optimize things, or they start by optimizing them, they over optimize. So it's
easy to like get really granular about this thing. But like the step from an n squared to an n log n
sorting algorithm is a big leap for most real world systems, no matter what the actual
behavior of the system is, that's a big leap. And the same can probably be said for other kind of
first leaps that you would take on a particular problem. Like it's picking the low hanging fruit
or whatever the equivalent of doing the not the dumbest thing, but the next to the dumbest thing
is picking the most delicious, reachable fruit. Yeah, most delicious, reachable fruit. I don't
know why that's not a saying. And yeah. Okay, so, so you then this is the 80s and this kind of idea
starts to percolate of learning. Yeah, I got to meet rich Sutton. So everything was sort of
downhill from there. And that was that was really the pinnacle of everything. But then I, you know,
then I felt like I was kind of on the inside. So then as interesting results were happening,
I could like check in with, with rich or with Jerry Tesaro, who had a huge impact on kind of
early thinking in, in temple difference learning and reinforcement learning and show that you
could do, you could solve problems that we didn't know how to solve any other way.
And so that was really cool. So it was good things were happening, I would hear about it from
either the people who were doing it, or the people who were talking to the people who were
doing it. And so I was able to track things pretty well through, through the 90s.
So what wasn't most of the excitement on reinforcement learning in the 90s era with,
what is it, TD gamma, like, what's the role of these kind of little like fun,
game playing things and breakthroughs about, you know, exciting the community? Was that,
like, what were your, because you've also built across or we're part of building a crossword
puzzle, uh, solver program, yeah, solving program, uh, called prover. So,
so you were interested in this as a problem, like in forming, in using games to understand how to
build, uh, intelligent systems. So like, what did you think about TD gamma? Like, what did you
think about that whole thing in the 90s? Yeah. I mean, I found the TD gamma result really just
remarkable. So I had known about some of Jerry's stuff before he did TD gamma and he did a system,
just more vanilla, well, not entirely vanilla, but a more classical backpropy kind of, uh,
network for playing backgammon, where he was training it on expert moves. So it was kind of
supervised. But the way that it worked was not to mimic the actions, but to learn internally
and evaluation function. So to learn, well, if the expert chose this over this, that must mean
that the expert values this more than this. And so let me adjust my weights to make it so that
the network evaluates this as being better than this. So it could learn from, from human
preferences, it could learn its own preferences. And then when he took the step from that to
actually doing it as a full on reinforcement learning problem where you didn't need a trainer,
you could just let it play, that was, that was remarkable. Right. And so I think as,
as humans often do, as we've done in the recent past as well, people extrapolate and it's like,
Oh, well, if you can do that, which is obviously very hard, then obviously you could do all these
other problems that we, that we want to solve that we know are also really hard. And it turned out
very few of them ended up being practical. Um, partly because I think neural nets,
it's certainly at the time we're struggling to be consistent and reliable. And so training them
in a reinforcement learning setting was a bit of a mess. I had, uh, I don't know, generation
after generation of like master students who wanted to do value function approximation,
basically learn reinforcement learning with neural nets. And over and over and over again,
we were failing. We couldn't get the, the good results that Jerry Tesarro got. I now believe
that Jerry is a neural net whisperer. He has a particular ability to get neural networks to
do things that other people would find impossible. And it's not the technology, it's the technology
and Jerry together. Yeah. At which I think speaks to the role of the human expert in the
process of machine learning. Right. It's so easy. We were so drawn to the idea that,
that it's the technology that is, that is where the power is coming from,
that I think we lose sight of the, of the fact that sometimes you need a really good,
just like, I mean, no one would think, Hey, here's this great piece of software. Here's like,
I don't know, GNU Emacs or whatever. Um, and it doesn't that prove that computers are super
powerful and basically going to take over the world. It's like, no, Stamina is a hell of a hacker.
Right. So he was able to make the code do these amazing things. He couldn't have done it without
the computer, but the computer couldn't have done it without him. And so I think people discount
the role of people like Jerry who, who, um, who have just a particular, a particular set of skills.
On that topic, by the way, as a small side note, I tweeted Emacs is greater than Vim yesterday
and deleted, deleted the tweet 10 minutes later when I realized it started a war. Yeah. I was like,
Oh, I was just kidding. I was just being provocative walk, walk, walk back. So people still feel
passionately about that particular piece of, uh, I don't get that cause Emacs is clearly so much
better. I don't understand. But you know, why do I say that? Because I, cause like I spent a block
of time in the eighties, um, making my fingers know the Emacs keys. And now like that's part
of the thought process for me. Like I need to express. And if you take that, if you take my Emacs
key bindings away, I become lit. Yeah. I can't express myself. I'm the same way with the, I
don't know if you know what, what it is, but a Kinesis keyboard, which is, uh, this butt shaped
keyboard. Yes, I've seen them. Yeah. And they're very, uh, I don't know, sexy, elegant. They're
beautiful. Yeah. They're, they're gorgeous, uh, way too expensive. But, uh, the, the problem with
them similar with Emacs is when you, once you learn to use it, it's harder to use other things.
It's hard to use other things. There's this absurd thing where I have like small, elegant,
lightweight, beautiful little laptops and I'm sitting there in a coffee shop with a giant
Kinesis keyboard and a sexy little laptop. It's absurd. But it, you know, like I used to feel
bad about it, but at the same time, you just kind of have to, sometimes it's back to the Billy Joel
thing. You just have to throw that Billy Joel record and throw Taylor Swift and Justin Bieber
to the wind. So. See, but I like them now because I, because again, I have no musical taste. Like,
like now that I've heard Justin Bieber enough, I like, I really like his songs and Taylor Swift,
not only do I like her songs, but my daughter's convinced that she's a genius. And so now I
basically have, I'm signed on to that. So. So yeah, that, that speaks to the back to the robustness
of the human brain. That speaks to the neuroplasticity that you can just, you can just like a mouse,
teach yourself to a, or a dog, teach yourself to enjoy Taylor Swift. I'll try it out. I don't know.
I try, you know what it has to do with just like acclimation, right? Just like you said,
a couple of weeks. Yeah. That's an interesting experiment. I'll actually try that. Like I'll
listen to. If that wasn't the intent of the experiment, just like social media, it wasn't
intended as an experiment to see what we can take as a society, but it turned out that way.
I don't think I'll be the same person on the other side of the week listening to Taylor Swift,
but let's try. You know, it's more compartmentalized. Don't be so worried. Like it's,
like I get that you can be worried, but don't be so worried because we compartmentalize really
well. And so it won't bleed into other parts of your life. You won't start, I don't know,
wearing red lipstick or whatever. Like it's, it's fine. It's fine. Change fashion and everything.
It's fine. But you know what? The thing you have to watch out for is you'll walk into a
coffee shop once we can do that again. And recognize the song. And you'll be, no,
you won't know that you're singing along until everybody in the coffee shop is looking at you.
And then you're like, that wasn't me. Yeah. That's the, you know, people are afraid of AGI. I'm
afraid of the Taylor Swift takeover. Yeah. And I mean, people should know that T.D. Gammon
was, I get, would you call it, do you like the terminology of self play by any chance?
So, so like systems that learn by playing themselves, just, I don't know if it's the best
word, but, uh, so what's, what's the problem with that term? Okay. So it's like the big bang,
like it's, it's like talking to serious physicists. Do you like the term big bang when, when it was
early? I feel like it's the early days of self play. I don't know. Maybe it was just previously,
but I think it's been used by only a small group of people. And so like, I think we're still deciding,
is this ridiculously silly name, a good name for the concept, potentially one of the most
important concepts in artificial intelligence. Okay. Depends how broadly you apply the term. So I
used the term in my 1996 PhD dissertation. Are you, wow, the actual terms of self play.
Yeah. Because, because Tassaro's paper was something like, um, training up an expert
backgammon player through self play. So I think it was in the title of his paper. If not in the
title, it was definitely a term that he used. There's another term that we got from that work
is rollout. So I don't know if you, do you ever hear the term rollout? That's a backgammon term
that has now applied generally in computers. Well, at least in AI, because of TDGammon. Yeah.
That's fascinating. So how is self play being used now? And like, why is it, does it, does it
feel like a more general powerful concept is sort of the idea of, well, the machine just
going to teach itself to be smart? Yeah. So that's, that's where maybe you can correct me,
but that's where, you know, the continuation of the spirit and actually like literally the exact
algorithms of TDGammon are applied by DeepMind and OpenAI to learn games that are a little bit
more complex, that when I was learning artificial intelligence go was presented to me with artificial
intelligence, the modern approach. I don't know if they explicitly pointed to go in those books
as like unsolvable kind of thing, like implying that these approaches hit their limit in this
have with these particular kind of games. So something, I don't remember if the book said
it or not, but something in my head for was the professors instilled in me the idea like,
this is the limits of artificial intelligence of the field. Like it instilled in me the idea that
if we can create a system that can solve the game of go, we've achieved AGI. That was kind of
I didn't explicitly like say this, but that was the feeling. And so from, I was one of the people
that it seemed magical when a learning system was able to beat a human world champion at the game
of go. And even more so from that, that was AlphaGo, even more so with AlphaGo zero than kind of
renamed and advanced into Alpha zero, beating a world champion or world class player without
any supervised learning on expert games we're doing only through by playing itself. So that
is, I don't know what to make of it. I think it'll be interesting to hear what your opinions are on
just how exciting, surprising, profound, interesting, or boring the breakthrough performance of Alpha
zero was. Okay. So AlphaGo knocked my socks off. That was so remarkable. Which aspect of it?
They got it to work that they actually were able to leverage a whole bunch of different ideas,
integrate them into one giant system. Just the software engineering aspect of it is mind blowing.
I don't, I've never been a part of a program as complicated as the program that they built for
that. And, and just the, you know, like, like Jerry Chisaro is a neural net whisperer, like,
you know, David Silver is a kind of neural net whisperer too. He was able to coax these networks
and these new way out there architectures to do these, you know, solve these problems that,
as you said, you know, when we were learning from AI, no one had an idea how to make it work.
It was, it was remarkable that these, you know, these, these techniques that were so good at
playing chess and that could beat the world champion in chess couldn't beat, you know,
your typical go playing teenager in Go. So the fact that the, you know, in a very short number
of years, we kind of ramped up to trouncing people in Go just blew me away.
So you, you're kind of focusing on the engineering aspect, which is also very surprising. I mean,
there's something different about large, well funded companies. I mean, there's a compute aspect to
it too. Sure. Like that, of course, I mean, that's similar to deep blue, right, with, with IBM.
Like there's something important to be learned and remembered about a large company taking
the ideas that are already out there and investing a few million dollars into it or, or more. And
so you're kind of saying the engineering is kind of fascinating, both on the, with AlphaGo is
probably just gathering all the data, right, of the, of the expert games, like organizing everything,
actually doing distributed supervised learning. And to me, see the engineering I kind of took
for granted, to me philosophically being able to persist in the, in the face of like long odds,
because it feels like for me, I'll be one of the skeptical people in the room thinking that you
can learn your way to, to beat go. Like it sounded like, especially with David Silver, it sounded
like David was not confident at all. So like it was like, not, it's funny how confidence works.
Yeah. It's like, you're not like cocky about it. Like, but. Right. Cause if you're cocky about it,
you, you kind of stop and stall and don't get anywhere. Yeah. But there's like a hope
that's unbreakable. Maybe that's better than confidence. It's a kind of wishful
hope and a little dream. And you almost don't want to do anything else. You kind of keep doing it.
That's, that seems to be the story and. But with enough skepticism that you're looking for where
the problems are and fighting through them. Yeah. Cause you know, there's got to be a way out of
this thing. Yeah. And for him, it was probably, there's, there's a bunch of little factors that
come into play. It's funny how these stories just all come together. Like everything he did in his
life came into play, which is like a love for video games and also a connection to, so the,
the nineties had to happen with TD Gammon and so on. Yeah. And in some ways it's surprising,
maybe you can provide some intuition to it that not much more than TD Gammon was done for quite
a long time on the reinforcement learning front. Yeah. Is that weird to you? I mean,
like I said, the, the students who I worked with, we tried to get,
to basically apply that architecture to other problems and we consistently failed. There were
a couple, a couple of really nice demonstrations that ended up being in the literature. There was
a paper about controlling elevators, right? Where it's, it's like, okay, can we modify the heuristic
that elevators use for deciding, like a bank of elevators for deciding which floors we should
be stopping on to maximize throughput essentially. And you can set that up as a reinforcement
learning problem and you can, you know, have a neural net represent the value function so that
it's taking where all the elevators, where the button pushes, you know, this high dimensional,
well, at the time, high dimensional input, you know, a couple dozen dimensions and turn that
into a prediction as to, oh, is it going to be better if I stop at this floor or not? And ultimately,
it appeared as though for the standard simulation distribution for people trying to leave the
building at the end of the day, that the neural net learned a better strategy than the standard one
that's implemented in elevator controllers. So that, that was nice. There was some work that
Satinder Singh at all did on handoffs with cell phones, you know, deciding when, when should you
hand off from this cell tower to this cell tower. Oh, okay, communication networks. Yeah. And so
a couple things seemed like they were really promising. None of them made it into production
that I'm aware of. And neural nets as a whole started to kind of implode around then. And so
there just wasn't a lot of air in the room for people to try to figure out, okay,
how do we get this to work in the RL setting? And then they, they found their way back in 10,
in 10 plus years. So you said Alpha Go was impressive, like it's a big spectacle. Is there
Right. So then Alpha zero. So I think I may have a slightly different opinion on this than
some people. So I talked to Satinder Singh in particular about this. So Satinder was
like Rich Sutton, a student of Antibarto. So they came out of the same lab, very influential,
machine learning, reinforcement learning researcher. Now deep behind as is, as is Rich,
though different sites, the two of them. He's in Alberta. Rich is in Alberta. And
Satinder would be in England, but I think he's in England from Michigan at the moment.
But the, but he was, yes, he was much more impressed with Alpha Go zero, which is didn't,
didn't get a kind of a bootstrap in the beginning with human trained games. And it's just was purely
self play. Though the first one Alpha Go was also a tremendous amount of self play, right? They
started off, they kickstarted the, the action network that was making decisions. But then
they trained it for a really long time using more traditional temple difference methods.
So, so as a result, I didn't, it didn't seem that different to me. Like, it seems like, yeah, why
wouldn't that work? Like once, once it works, it works. So what, but he found that, that removal
of that extra information to be breathtaking, like that, that's a game changer. To me, the first
thing was more of a game changer. But the open question, I mean, I guess that's the assumption
is the expert games might contain within them, within them a, yeah, this amount of information.
But we know that it went beyond that, right? We know that it somehow got away from that information
because it was learning strategies. I don't think it's, I don't think Alpha Go is just
better at implementing human strategies. I think it actually developed its own strategies that were,
that were more effective. And so from that perspective, okay, well, so it, it made at
least one quantum leap in terms of strategic knowledge. Okay, so now maybe it makes three.
Like, okay, but that first one is the doozy, right? Getting it to, to, to work reliably and,
and for the networks to, to hold on to the value well enough. Like that was, that was a big step.
Well, isn't, maybe you could speak to this on the reinforcement learning front. So the
starting from scratch and learning to do something like the first like, like random behavior to
like crappy behavior to like somewhat okay behavior. It's not obvious to me that that's not
like impossible to take those steps. Like if you just think about the intuition, like how the heck
does random behavior become somewhat basic intelligent behavior? Not, not human level,
not super human level, but just basic. But you're saying to you kind of the intuition is like,
if you can go from human to super human level intelligence on the, on this particular task
of game playing, then you're good at taking leaps. So you can take many of them.
That the system, I believe that the system can take that kind of leap. Yeah. And also,
I think that the beginner knowledge in go, like you can start to get a feel really quickly for
the idea that, you know, certain parts of the being in certain parts of the board seems to be
more associated with winning, right? Cause it's not, it's not stumbling upon the concept of winning.
It's told that it wins or that it loses. Well, it's self play. So it both wins and loses.
It's told which, which side won. And the information is kind of there to start percolating around to
make a difference as to, um, well, these things have a better chance of helping you win and these
things have a worse chance of helping you win. And so, you know, it can get to basic play,
I think pretty quickly, then once it has basic play, well, now it's kind of forced to do some
search to actually experiment with, okay, well, what gets me that next increment of, of improvement?
How far do you think, okay, this is where you kind of bring up the, the Elon Musk and the
Sam Harris is right. How far is your intuition about these kinds of self play mechanisms being
able to take us? Cause it feels one of the ominous, but stated calmly things that when I talked to
David Silver, he said, is that they have not yet discovered a ceiling for Alpha zero, for example,
on the game of Go or chess. Like it's, it keeps, no matter how much they compute, they throw at it,
it keeps improving. So it's possible, it's very possible that you, if you throw, you know, some
like 10 X compute that it will improve by five X or something like that. And when stated calmly,
it's so like, oh yeah, I guess so. But, but like, then you think like, well, can we potentially
have like continuations of Moore's law in totally different way, like broadly defined Moore's law,
not the exponential improvement like, are we going to have an Alpha zero that swallows the world?
But notice it's not getting better at other things. It's getting better at Go. And I think it's a,
that's a big leap to say, okay, well, therefore it's better at other things.
Well, I mean, the question is how much of the game of life can be turned into,
right? So that's, that I think is a really good question. And I think that we don't,
I don't think we as a, I don't know, community really know that the answer to this, but
so okay, so, so I went, I went to a talk by some experts on computer chess. So in particular,
computer chess is really interesting because for, you know, for, of course, for a thousand years,
humans were the best chess playing things on the planet. And then computers, like edge to
head of the best person, and they've been ahead ever since. It's not like people have, have
overtaken computers, but, but computers and people together have overtaken computers.
Right. So at least last time I checked, I don't know what the very latest is, but last time I
checked that there were teams of people who could work with computer programs to defeat the best
computer programs. In the game of Go. In the game of chess. In the game of chess. Right.
And so using the information about how these things called ELO scores, the sort of notion of
how strong a player are you, there's a, there's kind of a range of possible scores and this,
the, you, you increment and score. Basically, if you can beat another player of that lower score,
62% of the time or something like that, like there's some threshold of, if you can somewhat
consistently beat someone, then you are of a higher score than that person. And there's a question
as to how many times can you do that in chess? Right. And so we know that there's a range of
human ability levels that cap out with the best playing humans. And the computers went a step
beyond that. And computers and people together have not gone, I think, a full step beyond that.
It feels, the estimates that they have is that it's starting to asymptote, that we've reached
kind of the maximum, the best possible chess playing. And so that means that there's kind of a
finite strategic depth, right? At some point, you just can't get any better at this game.
Yeah. I mean, I don't, so I'll actually check that. I think it's interesting, because if you
have somebody like Magnus Carlson, who's using these chess programs to train his mind, like to
learn about chess. To become a better chess player, yeah. And so like, that's a very interesting
thing, because we're not static creatures. We're learning together. I mean, just like we're talking
about social networks, those algorithms are teaching us, just like we're teaching those
algorithms. So that's a fascinating thing. But I think the best chess playing programs are now
better than the pairs. Like they have competition between pairs, but it's still, even if they weren't,
it's an interesting question. Where's the ceiling? So the David, the ominous David Silver kind of
statement is like, we have not found the ceiling. Right. So the question is, okay, so I don't know
his analysis on that. From talking to Go experts, the depth, the strategic depth of Go seems to be
substantially greater than that of chess, that there's more kind of steps of improvement that
you can make getting better and better and better and better. But there's no reason to think that
it's infinite. Infinite, yeah. And so it could be that what David is seeing is a kind of asymptoting,
that you can keep getting better, but with diminishing returns. And at some point,
you hit optimal play. Like in theory, all these finite games, they're finite. They have an optimal
strategy. There's a strategy that is the minimax optimal strategy. And so at that point,
you can't get any better. You can't beat that, that strategy. Now, that strategy may be
from an information processing perspective, intractable, right? That you need.
All the situations are sufficiently different that you can't compress it at all. It's this
giant mess of hardcoded rules. And we can never achieve that. But that still puts a cap on how
many levels of improvement that we can actually make. But the thing about self play is if you put
it, although I don't like doing that, in the broader category of self supervised learning,
is that it doesn't require too much or any human human labeling. Yeah. Yeah. Human label or just
human effort, the human involvement past a certain point. And the same thing you could argue is true
for the recent breakthroughs in natural language processing with language models. Oh, this is
how you get to GPT three. Yeah, see how that did. That was a good, good transition. Yeah,
you're proud. I practiced that for days, leading up to this. But that's one of the questions is,
can we find ways to formulate problems in this world that are important to us humans,
like more important than the game of chess, that to which self supervised kinds of approaches
could be applied, whether it's self play, for example, for like, maybe you could think of
like autonomous vehicles in simulation, that kind of stuff, or just robotics applications
and simulation, or in the self supervised learning, where un annotated data or data that's generated
by humans naturally without extra costs, like the Wikipedia or like all of the internet can be
used to, to learn something about, to create intelligent systems that do something really
powerful, that pass the touring test, or that do some kind of super human level performance.
So what's your intuition, like trying to stitch all of it together about our discussion of AGI,
the limits of self play, and your thoughts about maybe the limits of neural networks
in the context of language models? Is there some intuition in there that might be useful to think
about? Yeah, yeah, yeah. So first of all, the whole transformer network family of things
is really cool. It's really, really cool. I mean, if you've ever, back in the day, you played with,
I don't know, Markov models for generating text, and you've seen the kind of text that they spit
out, and you compare it to what's happening now. It's, it's amazing. It's so amazing. Now, it doesn't
take very long interacting with one of these systems before you find the holes, right? It's,
it's not smart in any kind of general way. It's really good at a bunch of things, and it does seem
to understand a lot of the statistics of language extremely well. And that turns out to be very
powerful. You can answer many questions with that, but it doesn't make it a good conversation list,
right? And it doesn't make it a good storyteller. It just makes it good at imitating of things that
is seen in the past. The exact same thing could be said by people who voting for Donald Trump
about Joe Biden supporters and people voting for Joe Biden about Donald Trump supporters is,
you know, that they're not intelligent. They're just following the, yeah, they're following things
they've seen in the past. And so it's very, it doesn't take long to find the flaws in their,
in their like natural language generation abilities. Yes. Yes. So we're being very.
That's interesting. Critical of AS systems. Right. So, so I've had a similar thought,
which was that the stories that GPT three spits out are amazing and very human like.
And it doesn't mean that computers are smarter than we realize necessarily. It partly means that
people are dumber than we realize or that much of what we do day to day is not that deep. Like,
we're just, we're just kind of going with the flow. We're saying whatever feels like the natural
thing to say next. Not a lot of it is, is, is creative or meaningful or intentional. But enough
is that we actually get, we get by, right? And we do come up with new ideas sometimes and we do
manage to talk each other into things sometimes. And we do sometimes vote for reasonable people
sometimes. But, but it's really hard to see in the statistics because so much of what we're saying
is kind of wrote. And so our metrics that we use to measure how these systems are doing,
don't reveal that because it's, it's, it's in the interstices that, that is very hard to detect.
But is your, do you have an intuition that with these language models, if they grow in size,
it's already surprising that when you go from GPT two to GPT three, that there is a noticeable
improvement. So the question now goes back to the ominous David Silver and the ceiling.
Right. So maybe there's just no ceiling. We just need more compute. Now,
I mean, okay. So now I'm speculating as opposed to before when I was completely on firm ground.
Yeah. All right. I don't believe that you can get something that really can do language and use
language as a thing that doesn't interact with people. Like, I think that it's not enough to just
take everything that we've said written down and just say, that's enough. You can just learn from
that and you can be intelligent. I think you really need to be pushed back at. I think that
conversations, even people who are pretty smart, maybe the smartest thing that we know not, maybe
not the smartest thing we can imagine, but we get so much benefit out of talking to each other
and interacting. That's presumably why you have conversations live with guests is that, that there's
something in that interaction that would not be exposed by, oh, I'll just write you a story and
then you can read it later. And I think, I think because these systems are just learning from our
stories, they're not learning from being pushed back at by us, that they're fundamentally limited
into what they could actually become on this route. They have to, they have to get, you know,
shut down. We have to have an argument that, they have to have an argument with us and lose
a couple of times before they start to realize, oh, okay, wait, there's some nuance here that
actually matters. Yeah, that's actually subtle sounding, but quite profound that the intro
found that the interaction with humans is, is essential. And the limitation within that is
profound as well, because the time scale, like the bandwidth at which you can really interact
with humans is very low. So it's costly. So you can't, one of the underlying things about self
plays, it has to do, you know, a very large number of interactions. And so you can't really deploy
reinforcement learning systems into the real world to interact, like you couldn't deploy a language
model into the real world to interact with humans, because it would just not get enough data relative
to the cost it takes to interact, like the time of humans is, is expensive, which is really
interesting. That's that good, that takes us back to reinforcement learning and trying to figure out
if there's ways to make algorithms that are more efficient at learning, keep the spirit and reinforcement
learning and become more efficient. In some sense, this seems to be the goal. I'd love to hear what
your thoughts are. I don't know if you got the chance to see it. The blog post called Biddle
Lesson. Oh, yes. By Rich Sutton, that makes an argument, hopefully I can summarize it perhaps,
perhaps you can. Yeah, but good. Okay. So I mean, I could try and you can correct me, which is,
he makes an argument that it seems if we look at the long arc of the history of the artificial
intelligence field, it calls, you know, 70 years, that the algorithms from which we've seen the biggest
improvements in practice are the very simple, like dumb algorithms that are able to leverage
computation. And you just wait for the computation to improve, like all of the academics and so on
have fun by finding little tricks and, and congratulate themselves on those tricks. And
sometimes those tricks can be like big, that feel in the moment, like big spikes and breakthroughs,
but in reality, over the decades, it's still the same dumb algorithm that just waits for the
compute to get faster and faster. Do you find that to be an interesting argument against the
entirety of the field of machine learning as an academic discipline? That we're really just a
subfield of computer architecture. Yeah. We're just kind of waiting around for them to do their
next thing. We really don't want to do hardware work. So like, that's right. I really don't want
to, I don't want to think about hardware. We're procrastinating. Yes, that's right. Just waiting
for them to do their job so that we can pretend to have done ours. So, yeah, I mean, the argument
reminds me a lot of, I think it was a Fred Jelenet quote, early computational linguist who said,
you know, we're building these computational linguistic systems. And every time we fire a
linguist, performance goes up by 10%. Something like that. And so the idea of us building the
knowledge in, in that, in that case, was much less, he was finding it to be much less successful
than get rid of the people who know about language as a, you know, from a kind of
scholastic academic kind of perspective and replace them with more compute.
And so I think this is kind of a modern version of that story, which is, okay, we want to do better
on machine vision. You could build in all these, you know, motivated, part based models that,
you know, that just feel like obviously the right thing that you have to have, or we can throw a
lot of data at it and guess what we're doing better with it with a lot of data. So I hadn't
thought about it until this moment in this way. But what I believe, well, I've thought about what
I believe. What I believe is that, you know, compositionality and what's the right way to
say it, the complexity grows rapidly as you consider more and more possibilities, like
explosively. And so far, Moore's law has also been growing explosively, exponentially. And so,
so it really does seem like, well, we don't have to think really hard about the algorithm design
or the way that we build the systems, because the best benefit we could get is exponential,
and the best benefit that we can get from waiting is exponential, so we can just wait.
It's got, that's got to end, right? And there's hints now that Moore's law is starting to feel
some friction, starting to, the world is pushing back a little bit. One thing I don't know,
lots of people know this, I didn't know this, I was trying to write an essay. And
yeah, Moore's law has been amazing, and it's been, it's enabled all sorts of things. But there's a,
there's also a kind of counter Moore's law, which is that the development cost for each
successive generation of chips also is doubling. So it's costing twice as much money. So the amount
of development money per cycle or whatever is actually sort of constant. And at some point,
we run out of money. So, or we have to come up with an entirely different way of doing the
development process. So like, I guess I always, always a bit skeptical of the look, it's an
exponential curve, therefore it has no end. Soon the number of people going to Neuraps will be
greater than the population of the earth. That means we're going to discover life on other planets.
No, it doesn't. It means that we're in a, in a sigmoid curve on the front half, which looks
a lot like an exponential. The second half is going to look a lot like diminishing returns.
Yeah. The, I mean, but the interesting thing about Moore's law, if you actually like, look at the
technologies involved, it's hundreds, not thousands of S curves stacked on top of each other. It's
not actually an exponential curve. It's constant breakthroughs. And then what becomes useful to
think about, which is exactly what you're saying, the cost of development, like the size of teams,
the amount of resources that are invested in continuing to find new S curves, new breakthroughs.
And yeah, it's a, it's an interesting idea. You know, if we live in the moment, if we sit here
today, it seems to be the reasonable thing to say that exponentials end. And yet in the software
realm, they just keep appearing to be happening. And it's so, I mean, it's so hard to disagree
with Elon Musk on this because it like, I've, you know, I used to be one of those folks. I'm
still one of those folks I've studied autonomous vehicles. This is what I worked on. And, and
it's, it's like, you look at what Elon Musk is saying about autonomous vehicles, well, obviously
in a couple of years or in a year or, or next month, we'll have fully autonomous vehicles.
Like there's no reason why we can't driving is pretty simple. Like it's just a learning problem.
And you just need to convert all the driving that we're doing into data and just having you
all know with the trains and that data. And like we use only our eyes. So you can use cameras and
you can train on it. And it's like, yeah, that's that what that should work. And then you put that
hat on like the philosophical hat. And but then you put the pragmatic hat and it's like, this is
what the flaws of computer vision are like, this is what it means to train at scale. And then you
you put the human factors, the psychology hat on, which is like, it's actually driving us a lot,
the cognitive science or cognitive, whatever the heck you call it is, it's really hard. It's much
harder to drive than, than we realize there's a much larger number of edge cases. So building up
an intuition around this is, is around exponential is really difficult. And on top of that, the pandemic
is making us think about exponentials, making us realize that like, we don't understand anything
about it. We're not able to intuit exponentials. We're either ultra terrified, some part of the
population and some part is like the opposite of whatever the different carefree. And we're not
managing it. Blase. Blase. Well, wow, that's French. So it's got an accent. So it's, it's, it's
fascinating to think what, what the limits of this exponential growth of technology, not just
Moore's law, it's technology, how that rubs up against the bitter lesson in GPT three and self
playing mechanisms that is not obvious. I used to be much more skeptical about neural networks,
now at least give us slither possibility that will be all, that will be very much surprised.
And also, you know, caught in a way that like, we are not prepared for, like in applications of
social networks, for example, because it feels like really good transformer models that are able
to do some kind of like very good natural language generation of the same kind of models that could
be used to learn human behavior and then manipulate that human behavior to gain advertiser dollars
and all those kinds of things. Sure. To feed the capitalist system. And they arguably already
are manipulating human behavior. Yeah. So, but not for self preservation, which I think is a big,
that would be a big step. Like if they were trying to manipulate us to convince us not to
shut them off, I would be very freaked out. But I don't see a path to that from where we are now.
They don't have any of those abilities. That's not what they're trying to do. They're trying to
keep people on the site. But see, the thing is this, this is the thing about life on earth is
they might be borrowing our consciousness and sentience. Like, so like in a sense, they do
because the creators of the algorithms have like, they're not, you know, if you look at our body,
yeah, okay, we're not a single organism, we're a huge number of organisms with like tiny little
motivations, we're built on top of each other. In the same sense, the AI algorithms that they're not
like a system that includes human companies and corporations, right? Because corporations are
funny organisms in and of themselves that really do seem to have self preservation built in. And I
think that's at the, at the design level, I think the design to have self preservation be a focus.
So you're right, in that, in that broader system that we're also a part of and can have some influence
on, it's, it's, it is much more complicated, much more powerful. Yeah, I agree with that.
So people really love it when I ask, what three books, technical, philosophical fiction had a
big impact on your life, maybe you can recommend, we went with movies, we went with Billy Joel,
and I forgot what you, what music you recommended, but I didn't, I just said I have no taste in music,
I just like pop music. That was actually really skillful the way you avoided that question.
Thanks, I was, I'm going to try to do the same with the books.
So do you have a skillful way to avoid answering the question about three books you would recommend?
I'd like to tell you a story. So my first job out of college was at Bellcor, I mentioned that
before, where I worked with Dave Ackley, the head of the group was a guy named Tom Landauer,
and I don't know how well known he's known now, but arguably he's the, he's the inventor and the
first proselytizer of word embeddings. So they, they developed a system shortly before I got to the
group. Yeah, that, that called latent semantic analysis that would take words of English and
embed them in, you know, multi hundred dimensional space, and then use that as a way of, you know,
assessing similarity and basically doing reinforcement learning, not sorry, not reinforcement,
information retrieval, you know, sort of pre Google information retrieval.
And he was trained as an anthropologist, but then became a cognitive scientist,
I was in the cognitive science research group. It's, you know, like I said,
I'm a cognitive science groupie. At the time, I thought I'd become a cognitive scientist,
but then I realized in that group, no, I'm a computer scientist, but I'm a computer scientist
who really loves to hang out with cognitive scientists. And he said, he studied language
acquisition in particular, he said, you know, humans have about this number of words of vocabulary,
and most of that is learned from reading. And I said, that can't be true, because I have a really
big vocabulary, and I don't read. He's like, you must. I'm like, I don't think I do. I mean,
like stop signs, I definitely read stop signs. But like reading books is not, is not a thing
that I do a lot. Really, though, it might be just, maybe the red color. Do I read stop signs?
Yeah. No, it's just pattern recognition at this point. I don't sound it out.
Stop. So now I do, I wonder what that, oh yeah, stop the guns. So,
that's fascinating. So you don't, so I don't read very, I mean, obviously, I read and I've read,
I've read plenty of books. But like some people like Charles, my friend Charles and others,
like a lot of people in my field, a lot of academics, like reading was really a central
topic to them in development. And I'm not that guy. In fact, I used to joke that when I got into
college, that it was on kind of a help out the illiterate kind of program, because I got to
college, like in my house, I wasn't a particularly bad or good reader. But when I got to college,
I was surrounded by these people that were just voracious in their reading appetite.
And they would like, have you read this? Have you read this? Have you read this? And I'd be like,
no, I'm clearly not qualified to be at this school. Like there's no way I should be here.
Now I've discovered books on tape, like audio books. And so I'm much better. I'm more caught up,
I read a lot of books. A small tangent on that. It is a fascinating open question to me
on the topic of driving, whether, you know, supervised learning people, machine learning
people think you have to like drive to learn how to drive. To me, it's very possible that just by
us humans, by first of all, walking, but also by watching other people drive, not even being inside
cars as a passenger, but let's say being inside the cars as a passenger, but even just like being
a pedestrian and crossing the road, you learn so much about driving from that. It's very possible
that you can, without ever being inside of a car, be okay at driving once you get in it.
Or like watching a movie, for example, I don't know, something like that.
Have you, have you taught anyone to drive? No.
So I have two children and I learned a lot about car driving because my wife doesn't want to be the
one in the car while they're learning. So that's my job. So I sit in the passenger seat and it's
really scary. I have, you know, I have wishes to live and they're, you know, they're figuring things
out. Now, they start off very, very much better than I imagine like a neural network would, right?
They get that they're seeing the world. They get that there's a road that they're trying to be on.
They get that there's a relationship between the angle of the steering, but it takes a while to
not be very jerky. And so that happens pretty quickly. Like the ability to stay in lane at
speed, that happens relatively fast. It's not zero shot learning, but it's pretty fast.
The thing that's remarkably hard, and this is I think partly why self driving cars are really hard,
is the degree to which driving is a social interaction activity. And that blew me away.
I was completely unaware of it until I watched my son learning to drive. And I was realizing
that he was sending signals to all the cars around him. And those, in his case, he's,
he's always had social communication challenges. He was sending very mixed confusing signals to
the other cars. And that was causing the other cars to drive weirdly and erratically. And there
was no question in my mind that he would, he would have an accident because they didn't know how to
read him. There's things you do with the speed that you drive, the positioning of your car,
that you're constantly like in the head of the other drivers. And seeing him not knowing how to
do that and having to be taught explicitly, okay, you have to be thinking about what the other driver
is thinking was a revelation to me. I was stunned. It's a creating kind of theories of mind of the
other. The theories of mind of the other cars. Yeah. Yeah. Which I just hadn't heard discussed in
the self driving car talks that I've been to. Since then, there's some people who do do
consider those kinds of issues, but it's way more subtle than I think there's a little bit of work
involved with that. When you realize, like when you especially focus not on other cars, but on
pedestrians, for example, it's literally staring you in the face. Yeah. So then when you're just
like, how do I interact with pedestrians? You have pedestrians, you're practically talking to
an octopus at that point. They've got all these weird degrees of freedom. You don't know what
they're going to do. They can turn around any second. But the point is, we humans know what
they're going to do. We have a good theory of mind. We have a good mental model of what they're
doing. And we have a good model of the model they have of you and the model of the model of the
model. We're able to kind of reason about this kind of the social game of it. The hope is that
it's quite simple actually, that it could be learned. That's why I just talked to the Waymo.
I don't know if you know of that company. Google sells their every car. I talked to their CTO
about this podcast and they wrote in their car and it's quite aggressive and it's quite fast
and it's good and it feels great. It also just like Tesla, Waymo made me change my mind about
maybe driving is easier than I thought. Maybe I'm just being speciest human center. Maybe...
It's a speciest argument. Yes, I don't know. But it's fascinating to think about like the same
as with reading, which I think you just said. You avoided the question. I still hope you answered
someone. You avoided it brilliantly. There's blind spots as artificial intelligence that
artificial intelligence researchers have about what it actually takes to learn to solve a problem.
That's fascinating. Have you had Anka Dragan on? Yes. She's one of my favorites. So much energy.
She's amazing. Fantastic. And in particular, she thinks a lot about this kind of...
I know that you know that I know kind of planning. And the last time I spoke with her,
she was very articulate about the ways in which self driving cars are not solved,
like what's still really, really hard. But even her intuition is limited. We're all new to this.
So in some sense, the Elon Musk approach of being ultra confident and just like plowing...
Put it out there. Put it out there. Like some people say it's reckless and dangerous and so on.
But partly it seems to be one of the only ways to make progress in artificial intelligence.
These are difficult things. Democracy is messy. Implementation of artificial
intelligence systems in the real world is messy. So many years ago, before self driving cars were
an actual thing you could have a discussion about, somebody asked me, what if we could
use that robotic technology and use it to drive cars around? Aren't people going to be killed?
That's not what's going to happen. I said with confidence incorrectly, obviously.
What I think is going to happen is we're going to have a lot more like a very gradual kind of
rollout where people have these cars in like closed communities, where it's somewhat realistic,
but it's still in a box so that we can really get a sense of what are the weird things that
can happen? How do we have to change the way we behave around these vehicles? It obviously requires
a kind of co evolution that you can't just plop them in and see what happens.
But of course, we're basically plopping them in and see what happens. So I was wrong,
but I do think that would have been a better plan.
But your intuition is funny, just zooming out and looking at the forces of capitalism.
And it seems that capitalism rewards risk takers and rewards and punishes risk takers and
try it out. The academic approach to let's try a small thing and try to understand slowly the
fundamentals of the problem. And let's start with one and do two and then see that and then do the
three. The capitalists like startup entrepreneurial dream is let's build a thousand and let's...
Right. And 500 of them fail, but whatever the other 500 we learned from them.
But if you're good enough, I mean, one thing is like your intuition would say like,
that's going to be hugely destructive to everything. But actually it's kind of the forces
of capitalism. People are quite... It's easy to be critical, but if you actually look at the data
at the way our world has progressed in terms of the quality of life, it seems like the competent,
good people rise to the top. This is coming from me from the Soviet Union and so on.
It's interesting that somebody like Elon Musk is the way you push progress and artificial
intelligence. Like it's forcing Waymo to step their stuff up and Waymo is forcing Elon Musk
to step up. It's fascinating because I have this tension in my heart and just being upset by
the lack of progress in autonomous vehicles within academia. So there's huge progress
in the early days of the DARPA challenges. And then it just kind of stopped at MIT,
but it's true everywhere else with an exception of a few sponsors here and there. It's not seen
as a sexy problem. The moment artificial intelligence starts approaching the problems
of the real world, like academics kind of like, all right, let the...
Because they get really hard in a different way.
In a different way. That's right.
I think some of us are not excited about that other way.
But I still think there's fundamentals problems to be solved in those difficult things. It's
still publishable, I think. We just need to... It's the same criticism you could have of all
these conferences in Europe, in CVPR, where application papers are often as powerful and
as important as theory paper. Even theory just seems much more respectable and so on.
I mean, machine learning community is changing that a little bit, at least in statements,
but it's still not seen as the sexiest of pursuits, which is like, how do I actually
make this thing work in practice as opposed to on this toy dataset?
All that to say, are you still avoiding the three books question? Is there something on
audiobook that you can recommend? Oh, yeah. I mean, yeah, I've read a lot of really fun stuff.
In terms of books that I find myself thinking back on that I read a while ago,
like that have stood the test of time to some degree, I find myself thinking of
program or B programed a lot by Douglas Roschkopf, which was... It basically put out the premise
that we all need to become programmers in one form or another. It was in analogy to,
once upon a time, we all had to become readers. We had to become literate. There was a time before
that when not everybody was literate, but once literacy was possible, the people who were literate
had more of a say in society than the people who weren't. We made a big effort to get everybody
up to speed and now it's not 100% universal, but it's quite widespread. The assumption
is generally that people can read. The analogy that he makes is that programming is a similar
kind of thing, that we need to have a say in... Right. Being a reader, being literate, being a
reader means you can receive all this information, but you don't get to put it out there. Programming
is the way that we get to put it out there. That was the argument they made. I think he
specifically has now backed away from this idea. He doesn't think it's happening quite this way.
That might be true that society didn't play forward quite that way.
I still believe in the premise. I still believe that at some point,
we have... The relationship that we have to these machines and these networks has to be one of each
individual has the wherewithal to make the machines help them do the things that that
person once done. As software people, we know how to do that. When we have a problem, we're like,
okay, I'll hack up a pulse grip or something and make it so. If we lived in a world where
everybody could do that, that would be a better world. Computers would have, I think, less sway
over us. Other people's software would have less sway over us as a group.
Yeah. In some sense, software engineering is programming's power.
Programming is power. Right. Yeah. It's like magic. It's like magic spells. It's not out of reach
of everyone, but at the moment, it's just a sliver of the population who can
commune with machines in this way. I don't know. That book had a big impact on me.
Currently, I'm reading The Alignment Problem actually by Brian Christian. I don't know if
you've seen this out there yet. Is it similar to Stuart Russell's work with the control problem?
It's in that same general neighborhood. They have different
emphases that they're concentrating on. I think Stuart's book did a remarkably good job.
Like just a celebratory good job at describing AI technology and how it works. I thought that
was great. It was really cool to see that in a book. I think he has some experience writing
some books. That's probably a possible thing. He's maybe thought a thing or two about how to explain
AI to people. Yeah. Yeah. That's a really good point. This book so far has been remarkably good
at telling the story of the recent history of some of the things that have happened.
I'm in the first third. He said this book is in three thirds. The first third is essentially AI
fairness and implications of AI on society that we're seeing right now. That's been great. He's
telling those stories really well. He went out and talked to the frontline people whose names
were associated with some of these ideas. It's been terrific. He says the second half of the book
is on reinforcement learning. Maybe that'll be fun. Then the third half, third third,
is on the superintelligence alignment problem. I suspect that that part will be less fun for
me to read. Yeah. It's an interesting problem to talk about. I find it to be the most interesting
just like thinking about whether we live in a simulation or not as a thought experiment to
think about our own existence. In the same way, talking about alignment problem with AGI is a
good way to think, similar to the trolley problem with autonomous vehicles. It's a useless thing
for engineering, but it's a nice little thought experiment for actually thinking about our own
human ethical systems, our moral systems, by thinking how we engineer these things,
you start to understand yourself. SciFi can be good at that too. One sci fi book to recommend
is Excellations by Ted Chiang, a bunch of short stories. Ted Chiang is the guy who wrote the
short story that became the movie Arrival. All of his stories, just from a, he was a computer
scientist. Actually, he studied at Brown. They all have this really insightful bit of science
or computer science that drives them. It's just a romp. He creates these artificial worlds by
extrapolating on these ideas that we know about, but hadn't really thought through to this kind of
conclusion. His stuff is, it's really fun to read. It's mind warping. I'm not sure if you're
familiar. I seem to mention this every other word. I'm from the Soviet Union and I'm Russian.
I think my roots are Russian too, but a couple of generations back.
Well, it's probably in there somewhere. Maybe we can pull at that thread a little bit
of the existential dread that we all feel. I think somewhere in the conversation,
you mentioned that you don't really pretty much like dying. I forget in which context.
It might have been a reinforcement learning perspective. I don't know.
I know what it was. It was in teaching my kids to drive. That's how you face your mortality.
Yes. From a human beings perspective or from a reinforcement learning researchers perspective,
let me ask you the most absurd question. What do you think is the meaning of this whole thing,
the meaning of life on this spinning rock? I mean, I think reinforcement learning researchers
maybe think about this from a science perspective more often than a lot of other people. As a
supervised learning person, you're probably not thinking about the sweep of a lifetime,
but reinforcement learning agents are having little lifetimes, little weird little lifetimes,
and it's hard not to project yourself into their world sometimes.
As far as the meaning of life, when I turn 42, you may know from, that is a book I read,
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, that that is the meaning of life. When I turned 42,
I had a meaning of life party where I invited people over and everyone shared their meaning
of life. We had slides made up and so we all sat down and did a slide presentation to each other
about the meaning of life. Mine was balance. I think that life is balance.
And so the activity at the party, for a 42 year old, maybe this is a little bit nonstandard,
but I found all the little toys and devices that I had that where you had to balance on them.
You had to stand on it and balance or Pogo Stick I brought, a Rip Stick, which is like a weird
two wheeled skateboard. I got a Unicycle, but I didn't know how to do it. I now can do it.
I love watching you try. Yeah, I'll send you a video. I'm not great, but I managed.
And so balance, yeah. So my wife has a really good one that she sticks to and is probably
pretty accurate and it has to do with healthy relationships with people that you love and
working hard for good causes. But to me, yeah, balance, balance in a word. That works for me.
Not too much of anything because too much of anything is iffy.
That feels like a Rolling Stones song. I feel like there must be.
You can't always get what you want, but if you try sometimes, you can strike a balance.
Yeah, I think that's how it goes. I'll write you a parody.
It's a huge honor to talk to you. This is really fun. I've been a big fan of yours, so
I can't wait to see what you do next in the world of education, the world of parody,
in the world of reinforcement learning. Thanks for talking to me. My pleasure.
Thank you for listening to this conversation with Michael Littman and thank you to our sponsors.
Simply Safe, a home security company I use to monitor and protect my apartment,
ExpressVPN, the VPN I've used for many years to protect my privacy on the internet,
Masterclass, online courses that I enjoy from some of the most amazing humans in history,
and BetterHelp, online therapy with a licensed professional.
Please check out these sponsors in the description to get a discount and to support this podcast.
If you enjoy this thing, subscribe on YouTube, review it with five stars and up a podcast,
follow on Spotify, support on Patreon, or connect with me on Twitter at Lex Freedman.
And now, let me leave you some words from Groucho Marks. If you're not having fun,
you're doing something wrong. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.